Updates the Hybrid search tutorial (#6234)
elastic/docs-content: solutions/search/hybrid-semantic-text.md

Reviewer: nit: we should use present tense almost exclusively (and avoid semi-colons like the plague)

4. The textual data stored in the `content` field will be copied to `semantic_text` and processed by the {{infer}} endpoint.

::::::

::::::{tab-item} Using ML-nodes

```console
PUT semantic-embeddings
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "semantic_text": { <1>
        "type": "semantic_text", <2>
        "inference_id": ".elser-2-elasticsearch" <3>
      },
      "content": { <4>
        "type": "text",
        "copy_to": "semantic_text" <5>
      }
    }
  }
}
```

1. The name of the field to contain the generated embeddings for semantic search.
2. The field to contain the embeddings is a `semantic_text` field.
3. The `.elser-2-elasticsearch` preconfigured {{infer}} endpoint for the `elasticsearch` service is used. To use a different {{infer}} service, you must create an {{infer}} endpoint first using the [Create {{infer}} API]({{es-apis}}operation/operation-inference-put) and then specify it in the `semantic_text` field mapping using the `inference_id` parameter.
4. The name of the field to contain the original text for lexical search.
5. The textual data stored in the `content` field will be copied to `semantic_text` and processed by the {{infer}} endpoint.

::::::

> ::::::{tab-item} Using curl (EIS)

Reviewer: curl isn't a separate mode, it's just another way to run api calls

so if want to add curl, should add it as a sibling tab for each console command

```bash
curl -X PUT "${ELASTICSEARCH_URL}/semantic-embeddings" \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -H "Authorization: ApiKey ${API_KEY}" \
     -d '{
       "mappings": {
         "properties": {
           "semantic_text": { <1>
             "type": "semantic_text" <2>
           },
           "content": { <3>
             "type": "text",
             "copy_to": "semantic_text" <4>
           }
         }
       }
     }'
```

1. The name of the field to contain the generated embeddings for semantic search.
2. The field to contain the embeddings is a `semantic_text` field. Since no `inference_id` is provided, the [default {{infer}} endpoint](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/semantic-text-setup-configuration.md#default-endpoints) is used.
3. The name of the field to contain the original text for lexical search.
4. The textual data stored in the `content` field will be copied to `semantic_text` and processed by the {{infer}} endpoint.

::::::

:::::::

:::{dropdown} Example response
```console
{
  "acknowledged": true,
  "shards_acknowledged": true,
  "index": "semantic-embeddings"
}
```
:::

> :::{note}

Reviewer: we shouldn't stack admonitions of the same type as rule (and try not to stack admonitions as much as possible)

here we have 3 notes on top of each other, so it's a tell that we should find a nicer way to present this information

  serverless:
products:
  - id: elasticsearch
type: tutorial
description: Learn how to combine lexical and semantic search using a `text` field with `copy_to` into `content_embedding` (`semantic_text` type), from mapping through bulk ingest to hybrid queries.
---

# Hybrid search with `semantic_text` [semantic-text-hybrid-search]

This tutorial walks you through hybrid search using the [`semantic_text`](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/semantic-text.md) field type together with a `text` field for lexical search. By the end, you will be able to:

- Create an index mapping that supports storing both text content and vector embeddings for hybrid search
- Ingest documents so the same text is embedded for semantic search and available for full-text search
- Run hybrid queries using [retrievers](retrievers-overview.md) or [{{esql}}](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql.md)

> In hybrid search, semantic retrieval scores by meaning while lexical search scores by term overlap. Combining them often results in more robust rankings than either alone.

Reviewer 2: > term overlap

I would change this to something like "textual similarity"

The recommended way to use hybrid search in the {{stack}} follows the `semantic_text` workflow: you avoid hand-building {{infer}} ingest pipelines for embeddings while still keeping a dedicated `text` field for keyword-style matching. 

## Requirements [semantic-text-requirements]

> - In this tutorial, we show code examples for using both [Elastic {{infer-cap}} Service (EIS)](/explore-analyze/elastic-inference/eis.md) and ML-nodes. EIS is automatically enabled on {{ech}} deployments and {{serverless-short}} projects. You can also use [EIS for self-managed clusters](/explore-analyze/elastic-inference/connect-self-managed-cluster-to-eis.md).

Reviewer: do we have a link for ML-nodes?

Author: yes, added it :)

- To use the `semantic_text` field type with an {{infer}} service other than Elastic {{infer-cap}} Service, you must create an {{infer}} endpoint using the [Create {{infer}} API]({{es-apis}}operation/operation-inference-put).

:::{tip}
To run the `curl` examples in this tutorial, set the following environment variables:
```bash
export ELASTICSEARCH_URL="your-elasticsearch-url"
export API_KEY="your-api-key"
```
To generate API keys, search for `API keys` in the [global search bar](/explore-analyze/find-and-organize/find-apps-and-objects.md). [Learn more about finding your endpoint and credentials](/solutions/elasticsearch-solution-project/search-connection-details.md).
:::

## Create the index mapping [hybrid-search-create-index-mapping]

> ::::{note}

Reviewer: the content for this section is two sentences wedged between a giant note and big tip, so the reading experience isn't great

I think we can delete the web crawler/connector note

and make the tip more concise

> ## Create the index mapping [hybrid-search-create-index-mapping]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 1: Create the index mapping [hybrid-search-create-index-mapping]
```

You can run {{infer}} either using the [Elastic {{infer-cap}} Service](/explore-analyze/elastic-inference/eis.md) or on your own [{{ml}} nodes](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles.md#ml-node-role). 

:::{tip}
For large-scale dense vector deployments, quantization strategies like [BBQ](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/bbq.md) can reduce memory usage. For details, refer to [Optimizing vector storage](vector/vector-storage-for-semantic-search.md).
:::

> ### Using EIS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Use Elastic {{infer-cap}} Service
```

tiny suggestion: Might be good to spell it out in the **On this page**

> ### Use Elastic {{infer-cap}} Service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Option 1: Use Elastic {{infer-cap}} Service (recommended)
```

You can run {{infer}} either using the [Elastic {{infer-cap}} Service](/explore-analyze/elastic-inference/eis.md) or on your own ML-nodes. 

> ### Using EIS

Reviewer: we should't have headings that go straight into code blocks (or sub-headings), without lead-in text

4. The textual data stored in the `content` field will be copied to `semantic_text` and processed by the {{infer}} endpoint.

:::

:::{tab-item} curl

```bash
curl -X PUT "${ELASTICSEARCH_URL}/semantic-embeddings" \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -H "Authorization: ApiKey ${API_KEY}" \
     -d '{
       "mappings": {
         "properties": {
           "semantic_text": { <1>
             "type": "semantic_text" <2>
           },
           "content": { <3>
             "type": "text",
             "copy_to": "semantic_text" <4>
           }
         }
       }
     }'
```

1. The name of the field to contain the generated embeddings for semantic search.
2. The field to contain the embeddings is a `semantic_text` field. Since no `inference_id` is provided, the [default {{infer}} endpoint](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/semantic-text-setup-configuration.md#default-endpoints) is used.
3. The name of the field to contain the original text for lexical search.
4. The textual data stored in the `content` field will be copied to `semantic_text` and processed by the {{infer}} endpoint.

:::

::::

> :::{note}

Reviewer: again this note is very long compared to the core content

try to make it more condensed :)

> ### Using ML-nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Use machine learning nodes
```

> ### Use machine learning nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Option 2: Use machine learning nodes
```

> ### Using ML-nodes

Reviewer: needs lead-in text after heading

::::{tab-set}

:::{tab-item} Console

```console
PUT semantic-embeddings
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {

>       "semantic_text": { <1>

Reviewer: it's probably a bit confusing to name the field semantic_text, which is identical to the field _type_

something like `content_embedding` might be clearer?

     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -H "Authorization: ApiKey ${API_KEY}" \
     -d '{
       "mappings": {
         "properties": {
           "content_embedding": { <1>
             "type": "semantic_text", <2>
             "inference_id": ".elser-2-elasticsearch" <3>
           },
           "content": { <4>
             "type": "text",
             "copy_to": "content_embedding" <5>
           }
         }
       }
     }'
```

1. The name of the field to contain the generated embeddings for semantic search.
2. The field to contain the embeddings is a `semantic_text` field.
3. The `.elser-2-elasticsearch` [preconfigured {{infer}} endpoint](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/semantic-text-setup-configuration.md#preconfigured-endpoints) for the `elasticsearch` service is used. 
4. The name of the field to contain the original text for lexical search.
5. The textual data stored in the `content` field is copied to `content_embedding` and processed by the {{infer}} endpoint.

:::

::::

:::{dropdown} Example response
```console
{
  "acknowledged": true,
  "shards_acknowledged": true,
  "index": "semantic-embeddings"
}
```
:::

> ## Ingest data [hybrid-semantic-text-ingest-data]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 2: Ingest data [hybrid-semantic-text-ingest-data]
```

> With your index mapping in place, you can add some data. You only need to populate the `content` field: {{es}} stores it as `text` for lexical search and, because of `copy_to`, copies the same string into `semantic_text`, which sends the text to the configured {{infer}} endpoint and stores embeddings on the document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With your index mapping in place, you can add some data. You only need to populate the `content` field. {{es}} stores its value as `text` for lexical search, and `copy_to` duplicates that same value into the `content_embedding` field. Because `content_embedding` is of type `semantic_text`, {{es}} then sends the value to the {{infer}} endpoint and stores the resulting embeddings.
```

just some rewording for clarity, and assumes you've renamed the field per previous comment

> Use the [`_bulk` API](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-bulk) to ingest the same sample documents as in [Semantic search with `semantic_text`](semantic-search/semantic-search-semantic-text.md):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the [`_bulk` API](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-bulk) to ingest the same sample documents:
```

not sure the value of linking to that other tutorial here, might be confusing

        "_id": "1",
        "_version": 1,
        "result": "created",
        "_shards": {
          "total": 2,
          "successful": 2,
          "failed": 0
        },
        "_seq_no": 0,
        "_primary_term": 1,
        "status": 201
      }
    },
    {
      "index": {
        "_index": "semantic-embeddings",
        "_id": "2",
        "_version": 1,
        "result": "created",
        "_shards": {
          "total": 2,
          "successful": 2,
          "failed": 0
        },
        "_seq_no": 1,
        "_primary_term": 1,
        "status": 201
      }
    },
    {
      "index": {
        "_index": "semantic-embeddings",
        "_id": "3",
        "_version": 1,
        "result": "created",
        "_shards": {
          "total": 2,
          "successful": 2,
          "failed": 0
        },
        "_seq_no": 2,
        "_primary_term": 1,
        "status": 201
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

Each document is indexed with `content` for search. The same text is copied to `content_embedding` and embedded through the configured {{infer}} endpoint.

:::

If you encounter errors, check that your index mapping and {{infer}} endpoint are configured correctly.

> ## Run a hybrid search query [hybrid-search-perform-search]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 3: Run a hybrid search query [hybrid-search-perform-search]
```

> With data ingested into `semantic-embeddings`, you can run hybrid search that combines lexical matches on `content` with semantic retrieval on `semantic_text`. You can choose between [retrievers](retrievers-overview.md) or [{{esql}}](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql.md) syntax.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you have data in your index, you can run hybrid search to combine lexical matches on `content` with vector search over `content_embeddings`. You can choose between [retrievers](retrievers-overview.md) or [{{esql}}](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql.md) syntax.
```

Reviewer: wording tighten

> Both the retriever and {{esql}} approaches return hits ranked by a fused relevance score: lexical matches on `content` and semantic matches on `semantic_text` both contribute, so passages that align with the query in either sense tend to appear higher.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both the retriever and {{esql}} approaches return hits ranked by a score that fuses lexical matches on `content` with semantic matches on `semantic_text`. Passages that match on both signals rank highest, followed by those that match on only one.
```

Short sentences are easier to keep clear, it's _generally_ a good idea to replace colons or semi-colons with periods.

> passages that align with the query in either sense tend to appear higher.

this isn't super clear phrasing

:::{note}
For recommended ways to query and retrieve `semantic_text` data, refer to [Search and retrieve `semantic_text` fields](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/semantic-text-search-retrieval.md).
:::

> ### Retrievers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Use retrievers
```

[Retrievers](retrievers-overview.md) provide a structured way to define and combine different search strategies, such as lexical and semantic search, within a single _search request.  This tutorial uses the [RRF retriever](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/rest-apis/retrievers.md#rrf-retriever), which merges two [standard retrievers](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/rest-apis/retrievers.md#standard-retriever): one runs a lexical `match` on `content`, the other a `match` on `semantic_text` for semantic retrieval.

::::{tab-set}

> :::{tab-item} Query DSL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::{tab-item} Console
```

3. The second `standard` retriever refers to the semantic search.
4. The `semantic_text` field is used to perform the semantic search.

:::::

:::::{tab-item} ES|QL
:sync: esql

The ES|QL approach uses a combination of the match operator `:` and the match function `match()` to perform hybrid search.

```console
POST /_query?format=txt
{
  "query": """
    FROM semantic-embeddings METADATA _score <1>
    | WHERE content: "muscle soreness running?" OR match(semantic_text, "How to avoid muscle soreness while running?", { "boost": 0.75 }) <2> <3>
    | SORT _score DESC <4>
    | LIMIT 1000
  """
}
```

1. The `METADATA _score` clause returns the relevance score of each document.
2. The [match (`:`) operator](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/functions-operators/operators.md#esql-match-operator) performs keyword matching on the `content` field.
3. The `match()` function runs semantic search on the `semantic_text` field with a boost of `0.75`.
4. Sorts by descending score and limits to 1000 results.

:::::

> :::::{tab-item} Query DSL (curl)

Reviewer: again curl/console should be sibling sub-tabs

    "total": 6,
    "successful": 6,
    "skipped": 0,
    "failed": 0
  },
  "hits": {
    "total": {
      "value": 3,
      "relation": "eq"
    },
    "max_score": 0.032786883,
    "hits": [
      {
        "_index": "semantic-embeddings",
        "_id": "akiYKZ0BGwHk8ONXXqmi",
        "_score": 0.032786883,
        "_source": {
          "content": "After running, cool down with light cardio for a few minutes to lower your heart rate and reduce muscle soreness."
        }
      },
      {
        "_index": "semantic-embeddings",
        "_id": "a0iYKZ0BGwHk8ONXXqmi",
        "_score": 0.016129032,
        "_source": {
          "content": "Marathon plans stress weekly mileage; carb loading before a race does not replace recovery between hard sessions."
        }
      },
      {
        "_index": "semantic-embeddings",
        "_id": "bEiYKZ0BGwHk8ONXXqmi",
        "_score": 0.015873017,
        "_source": {
          "content": "Tune cluster performance by monitoring thread pools and refresh interval."
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

The returned hits show fused `_score` rankings after RRF over lexical `content` and semantic `content_embedding` retrieval.

:::

> ### {{esql}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Use {{esql}}
```

> [{{esql}}](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql.md) is the query language of {{es}} for filtering, transforming, and analyzing data. It supports both lexical and semantic search, making it easy to combine keyword matching, vector search, scoring, and result processing in a single query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[{{esql}}](/solutions/search/esql-for-search.md) is a piped query language which supports both lexical and semantic search. This enables combining keyword matching, vector search, scoring, and result processing in a single query.
```

simpler phrasing, and probably good to link to this search page
